Rehan Ali and Michael Xiong
CSE 134
May 6th, 2024
Professor Quinn

# Programming Assignment 2 Design Doc

## Command Line Parsing

### Data Structures Created

For the command line parsing, I did not create any new data structures. However, I did edit the thread struct to store its own process id, something I will discuss
in the next section.

### Algorithms Used

The algorithm I used for the command line parsing was rather straightforward. It first starts in the process_execute function, where I use the reverse strtok function
to parse the words by the space delimiter. These are then copied into a char** pointer, where it now needs to be reversed again to be put in the proper order. I do this by iterating through the initial char** pointer backwards and storing them sequentially in another char** pointer. Then, I copy the elements of this new char** pointer back into the old char** pointer. While this may seem a roundabout way to do it, this was to serve as a fix to an earlier problem and this way required the least amount of refactoring. Additionally, because strtok_r also writes null bytes, I had to make another copy of the string and rerun strok_r on it again to ensure that a thread could properly store its own process name within the thread. This is used in the process termination message, which will be discussed later. Moving on, This char** pointer is passed down the function call stack, from start_process to load(), ultimately to setup stack, where all of the arguments are pushed into the esp register via the interrupt frame's esp member. To push all of the relevant information onto the stack, I had to follow the order outlined in the pintos docs, where you first push the strings themselves onto the stack, then a null pointer, then the pointer to the strings, then the pointer to the first argument in argv, then argc, and then finally a fake return address. To do this, I had to calculate the size of each member and ensure I was allocating enough space on the stack via the strlen() and the sizeof operator. Then, I had to make sure the esp pointer was cast appropriately to ensure that the information was stored properly at that particular location.

### Synchronization Used

I did not use any synchronization primitives for this part of the assignment as every thread has its own stack, and thus there are no data races or conflicts that I need to worry about.

### Design Justification

I was able to verify the functionality of this design via the hex_dump function. What I would do is after every push to the stack, I would call the hex_dump function as follows:

```
hex_dump((uintptr_t) *esp, *esp, 64, true);
```

What this does is it prints the 64 bytes around the esp pointer register so that I could see if everything was being pushed to the stack properly. I was then able to compare the output with the output shown on the pintos website to ensure that everything was pushed to the stack properly. Another way I was able to verify the functionality of the stack was through reasoning about the amount of space each particular object I was pushing onto the stack was taking. For example, I had to allocate enough space for each string by calculating the length of the string and then decrementing the esp pointer by that particular amount. This is because when the esp pointer is decremented, it can be considered to be pushing onto the stack. Seeing as my design follows the 80x86 calling convention for thread stacks, I can confidently say my design is justified.


## System Calls

### Data Structures Created

We extended the original implementation of the thread to allow more functionality, changes include:

* int exit_status to hold return code
* list children_list to store all the child threads of the thread
* thread* parent to store pointer to the parent of the thread
* file* file_discriptor_table[256] to store file descriptors of the thread
* process_info* process_info: a new struct for each thread to store info after termination.

A new struct called process_info is created to allow the parent thread to access the child threads’ exit_status after the child has exited, it also contains a semaphore (initially 0) for synchronization among parent and child threads.

### Algorithms Used

Our syscalls follow the following general steps:

1. validate the arguments passed in from the stack
   * if invalid, update exis_status and eax pointer (if needed), then exit the thread
2. call corresponding functions
3. save return value to eax pointer (if needed)
4. if the file system is used, a lock will be used to prevent multiple threads accessing at the same time.

We also have some simple algorithms:

* file system lock: only one thread is allowed to use the file system at a time
* user pointer validation: a helper function that checks for null pointer, user virtual address space, and the correct page table.
* file descriptor validation: a helper function that checks the bound of file descriptor value, and whether it’s already saved in the current thread.

### Synchronization Used

The syscalls heavily depend on our parent-child-process-synchronization , which works as follows:

1. When a thread creates a new child, it first initializes the new child with all its properties, and creates a new process_info, which the thread saves into the child_list.
2. When a parent thread is waiting on its child thread, it will be blocked until the child has exited itself: Because the semaphore in process_info is initialized as 0, the parent thread is blocked when it tries to call a sema_down() in process_wait(). The parent thread will be eventually unblocked when the child thread calls sema_up() upon its exit. And after that, the parent thread can extract the exit_status from the process_info of the child and clean it up.
3. As mentioned above, when a thread exits, it will call sema_up() to unblock its waiting parent thread. But before it does so, it will save its exit_code into its process_info first.

### Design Justification

* In terms of safety, there are validation checks for user pointers, a lock for file system access, and semaphores for thread synchronization. These are in place to ensure any unexpected input from the user will be caught, and dealt with.
* In terms of efficiency, our thread synchronization implementation ensures that there is no busy waiting, and any “waiting” thread will be properly blocked. On top of that, the process_info struct allows threads to exit freely, because it will hold onto the information, so threads won’t have to wait for their parent to call wait on them, or even wait for their sibling thread to finish. And since process_info is a very lightweight struct, the impact on its extra memory usage is negligible.

## Process Termination Message

### Data Structures Created

For the process termination message, we implemented that in the wait system call. The main data structure we created for this part of the assignment was the list of children in the thread struct. What this did is it maintained the list of children for the parent process so it can keep track of its children's exit codes for the syscalls. In the process_wait() function, the child would look for itself in its parent's children list so that it can properly update the relevant information, namely its exit status, and send it to the parent thread. These structs are called process_info structs.

### Algorithms Used

Although simple, the algorithm we use for the process termination message is quite effective. The way we do it is that when a child thread exits, we send its exit status to its process info struct in its parent thread. This allows the parent thread to keep track of the exit codes of its child processes for the relevant tests, such as exec-multiple. Then, the parent waits for its child until it has finished terminating, which can be seen via the sema_down call. Finally, we get the child's exit code and its process name from its thread struct, and use printf to output the process termination message. This simple algorithm is what allows us to keep track of when processes are terminated.

### Synchronization Used

While we did not use any synchronization primitives for the process termination message itself, we did use them to make sure the process is actually terminated before we print out the messaege. This is done via a call to sema_down in order for a parent to wait on its child. This is because each child has its own semaphore that the parent keeps track of in order for the parent to block while the child is running. Then, when the child exits, that is when we increment the semaphore to unblock the parent.

### Design Justification

Our justification for our design is that a parent waits for its children to finish executing before a process termination message is printed. Because each child has its own semaphore that is decremented at the start of the process and incremented when the process exits, we can ensure that a child has finished execution when it increments its semaphore. Additionally, because each child has its own semaphore, a parent process can spawn multiple child threads with no issue. Finally, each thread stores its own return code and process name, which allows us to print the process termination message in the format specified by the assignment document.


## User Memory

### Data Structures Created

n/a

### Algorithms Used

A simple function was used to check for safe user memory access (mentioned in syscall):

    validate_user_poiter(const void *ptr)

This function checks for three conditions:

* Is the pointer NULL?
* Is the pointer within the user's virtual memory address space?
* Is the pointer within the page table of the current process?

If any of the current conditions is true, the function will immediately return false. Otherwise true.

### Synchronization Used

n/a

### Design Justification

Our design for checking safe user memory access is guaranteed to be safe because this function utilizes the originally provided functions from Pintos: is_user_vaddr() from vaddr.h, and pagedir_get_page() from pagedir.c. We simply put them together with a NULL pointer check to create this helper function that every syscall uses.
