Rehan Ali and Michael Xiong<br>
CSE 134<br>
May 6th, 2024<br>
Professor Quinn<br>

# Programming Assignment 2 Design Doc

## Command Line Parsing

### Data Structures Created

For command line parsing, I created a new struct called exec_args, which held the parsed arguments as a char** and the amount of arguments as an int. I used this arg 
to transfer the state between the process execute, start process, load, and setup_stack functions in an elegant way that avoided the use of a global variable. While I did try this approach initially, it encountered some problems when we were running the syn-read and syn-write tests, likely due to all of the threads reading from the same location for their arguments. Additionally, we also added another member to the thread struct to store the name of a particular process. 

### Algorithms Used

The algorithm I used for the command line parsing was rather trivial. First, I take in the arguments from run_task and store them in an exec_args struct. Then, I feed both the string and the exec_arg struct into process_execute, where I use strtok_r to parse the arguments by the space delimiter. Then, I pass the exec args struct down into start_process, load(), and ultimately setup stack where I then pass the parsed arguments into the esp register. In order to do this, I had to calculate the size of data structure I wanted to push onto the stack, decrement the esp pointer by that amount, and then store the data struture in the esp pointer. I used this approach to store all of the relevant information onto the stack as specified in the pintos docs. For example, to store the strings themselves I would calculate the length of the string via 
```
strlen()
```
and then decrement the esp pointer by that specific amount + 1. Then, I would store the string in the esp pointer like so. 
```
memcpy(*esp, <string>, strlen(string)+1)
```
For pointers, I would use the sizeof macro like so:
```
sizeof(char*)
```
Another important thing was making sure I casted the esp pointer to the proper type so that when I decremented it, the appropriate amount of space would be allocated on the stack. To do this, I would use the casting operator in C to cast the esp pointer to the appropriate type, then derefeence it, and then finally store the information in the pointer like so:
```
*((char**) *esp) = <address to string>
```
Finally, I would copy the first argument into the current thread's name2 member for the process termination message, which is discussed later on. 
This covers the general algorithm I used for string parsing. 


### Synchronization Used

N/A

### Design Justification

I was able to verify the functionality of this design via the hex_dump function. What I would do is after every push to the stack, I would call the hex_dump function as follows:

```
hex_dump((uintptr_t) *esp, *esp, 64, true);
```

What this does is it prints the 64 bytes around the esp pointer register so that I could see if everything was being pushed to the stack properly. I was then able to compare the output with the output shown on the pintos website to ensure that everything was pushed to the stack properly. Another way I was able to verify the functionality of the stack was through reasoning about the amount of space each particular object I was pushing onto the stack was taking. For example, I had to allocate enough space for each string by calculating the length of the string and then decrementing the esp pointer by that particular amount. This is because when the esp pointer is decremented, it can be considered to be pushing onto the stack. Seeing as my design follows the 80x86 calling convention for thread stacks, I can confidently say my design is justified.


## System Calls

### Data Structures Created

We extended the original implementation of the thread to allow more functionality, changes include:

* int exit_status to hold return code
* list children_list to store all the child threads of the thread
* thread* parent to store pointer to the parent of the thread
* file* file_discriptor_table[256] to store file descriptors of the thread
* process_info* process_info: a new struct for each thread to store info after termination.

A new struct called process_info is created to allow the parent thread to access the child threads’ exit_status after the child has exited, it also contains a semaphore (initially 0) for synchronization among parent and child threads.

### Algorithms Used

Our syscalls follow the following general steps:

1. validate the arguments passed in from the stack
   * if invalid, update exis_status and eax pointer (if needed), then exit the thread
2. call corresponding functions
3. save return value to eax pointer (if needed)
4. if the file system is used, a lock will be used to prevent multiple threads accessing at the same time. We also use the same lock in the load() function to ensure multiple child processes atomically access the file system. 

For validating the arguments on the stack, the process typically stayed the same where we would use the builtin functions:
```
is_user_vaddr() //and
pagedir_get_page()
```
As well as checking if the pointer was null. We wrote a wrapper for these functions that takes in a pointer and feeds it into these three functions. For functions that would be using a buffer, we were able to simply check the first and last byte in order to validate the entire buffer, as memory is guarenteed to be contiguous in the current VM implementation of PintOS. For exec, we had to individually validate each byte address in order to make sure to pass the various bad bounds tests, as we did not know the length of the string ahead of time. 

We also have some simple algorithms:

* file system lock: only one thread is allowed to use the file system at a time
* user pointer validation: a helper function that checks for null pointer, user virtual address space, and the correct page table.
* file descriptor validation: a helper function that checks the bound of file descriptor value, and whether it’s already saved in the current thread.

### Synchronization Used

The syscalls heavily depend on our parent-child-process-synchronization , which works as follows:

1. When a thread creates a new child, it first initializes the new child with all its properties, and creates a new process_info, which the thread saves into the child_list.
2. When a parent thread is waiting on its child thread, it will be blocked until the child has exited itself: Because the semaphore in process_info is initialized as 0, the parent thread is blocked when it tries to call a sema_down() in process_wait(). The parent thread will be eventually unblocked when the child thread calls sema_up() upon its exit. And after that, the parent thread can extract the exit_status from the process_info of the child and clean it up.
3. As mentioned above, when a thread exits, it will call sema_up() to unblock its waiting parent thread. But before it does so, it will save its exit_code into its process_info first.

Additionally, we also use a lock on the entire file system, where all file system calls would attempt to acquire this lock. This enforced the fact that only one thread could be in the operating system at a time. 

### Design Justification

* In terms of safety, there are validation checks for user pointers, a lock for file system access, and semaphores for thread synchronization. These are in place to ensure any unexpected input from the user will be caught, and dealt with.
* In terms of efficiency, our thread synchronization implementation ensures that there is no busy waiting, and any “waiting” thread will be properly blocked. On top of that, the process_info struct allows threads to exit freely, because it will hold onto the information, so threads won’t have to wait for their parent to call wait on them, or even wait for their sibling thread to finish. And since process_info is a very lightweight struct, the impact on its extra memory usage is negligible.

## Process Termination Message

### Data Structures Created

For the process termination message, we implemented that in the wait system call. The main data structure we created for this part of the assignment was the list of children in the thread struct. What this did is it maintained the list of children for the parent process so it can keep track of its children's exit codes for the syscalls. In the process_wait() function, the child would look for itself in its parent's children list so that it can properly update the relevant information, namely its exit status, and send it to the parent thread. These structs are called process_info structs.

### Algorithms Used

Although simple, the algorithm we use for the process termination message is quite effective. The way we do it is that when a child thread exits, we send its exit status to its process info struct in its parent thread. This allows the parent thread to keep track of the exit codes of its child processes for the relevant tests, such as exec-multiple. Then, the parent waits for its child until it has finished terminating, which can be seen via the sema_down call. Finally, we get the child's exit code and its process name from its thread struct, and use printf to output the process termination message. This simple algorithm is what allows us to keep track of when processes are terminated.

### Synchronization Used

While we did not use any synchronization primitives for the process termination message itself, we did use them to make sure the process is actually terminated before we print out the messaege. This is done via a call to sema_down in order for a parent to wait on its child. This is because each child has its own semaphore that the parent keeps track of in order for the parent to block while the child is running. Then, when the child exits, that is when we increment the semaphore to unblock the parent.

### Design Justification

Our justification for our design is that a parent waits for its children to finish executing before a process termination message is printed. Because each child has its own semaphore that is decremented at the start of the process and incremented when the process exits, we can ensure that a child has finished execution when it increments its semaphore. Additionally, because each child has its own semaphore, a parent process can spawn multiple child threads with no issue. Finally, each thread stores its own return code and process name, which allows us to print the process termination message in the format specified by the assignment document.


## User Memory

### Data Structures Created

N/A

### Algorithms Used

A simple function was used to check for safe user memory access (mentioned in syscall):

    validate_user_pointer(const void *ptr)

This function checks for three conditions:

* Is the pointer NULL?
* Is the pointer within the user's virtual memory address space?
* Is the pointer within the page table of the current process?

If any of the current conditions is true, the function will immediately return false. Otherwise true. Additionally, we also use different methods for checking the syscalls that use buffers. For read and write, we check the first and last byte to validate the entire buffer, as memory is guarenteed to be contiguous in this version of pintos. For exec, we iterate through the entire string and check if each character is valid. This is because we do not know the length of the string ahead of time, and thus cannot calculate the pointer to the final character in the argument. 

### Synchronization Used

N/A

### Design Justification

Our design for checking safe user memory access is guaranteed to be safe because this function utilizes the originally provided functions from Pintos: is_user_vaddr() from vaddr.h, and pagedir_get_page() from pagedir.c. We simply put them together with a NULL pointer check to create this helper function that every syscall uses. Additionally, memory is guarenteed to be contiguous in pintos, thus validating the first and last byte of a buffer is enough to check if the entire buffer is able to be accessed. 
