Rehan Ali and Michael Xiong `<br>`
CSE 134`<br>`
Professor Quinn`<br>`
May 27, 2023`<br>`

# Assignment 3 Design Doc

## Paging

### Data Structures Created

In our design we created three new data structures: a supplemental page table, a frame table, and a swap table. The supplemental page table is a hash table consisting of vm_entry structs, which contain the fields location, the address of the supplemental page table entry, the permissions of the page, and the arguments to load_segment and block_read. The idea behind this struct was to store all of the information for a given page so that when it was evicted, it could be recreated. The vm_entry struct was hashed by the address so that it could quickly be accessed. Additionally, the permissions of the page were stored so that in case the page was read only, it could not be modified. The frame table was simply a list that contained a series of frame_entry structs. These contained the address of the frame itself, the pointer to the corresponding vm_entry struct, the owner of the frame, and the list_elem struct. Finally, the swap table we designed involved a bit map, where if a bit was 1 that represented a used sector, and if it was 0 then it was a free sector. The idea behind this was that we could find a continuous section of 8 bits, which would represent a page's worth of space for an evicted page.

### Algorithms:

In paging, we use the FIFO algorithm to allow eviction of the frames: We store the frames in a list, and new entries are always added to the end of the list. This way, the head is always the oldest entry of the list.

### Synchronization used

For the synchronization we used for paging, we used a lock for the frame table and the swap table and a lock for the page fault exception. The reason for this is that each thread has its own supplemental page table, and thus there will only be 1 writer for each supplemental page table, removing the need for synchronization. Additionally, we need a lock for the frame table and the swap table because there are multiple writers to those data structures. Additionally, we needed a lock for the page fault exception just to ensure that there was only one writer in the critical section of the page fault. This ensured that there were no data races within the page fault exception.

### Changes made from Project 2

There were no significant design changes from project 2.

### Justification the Design Works

For the justification of the design, we know that for a process to allocate more memory, it must find physical memory on the computer to work. Suppose there is no more physical memory left, that means we need to find a way to make more space for the new memory that is needed. First, we must store the informatino about the new information in the supplemental page table so that we can always reference it. This is because the page that is going to be evicted is might be used later. Now, we need to evict the frame by copying it to swap. This way, it is no longer in the machine's physical memory but still in a location such that in can be referenced later. Then, the new page can be copied into physical memory because now there is space for an additional page.

## Growable Stack

### Data structures created:

Shared the same new data structures from the Paging section.

### Algorithms:

When a page fault happens, we check for the reason in page_fault. If it is caused by needing more stack, we will call our handle_stack_growth helper function. If it is caused by invalid access, we kill the thread and make it exit failure. handle_stack_growth is very straightforward: it simply checks for safety, tries to get a new frame (do eviction if needed), and inserts the new frame into the supplemental page table of the thread.

### Synchronization used:

We made a new lock: page_fault_lock, which is used in page_fault, this allows only one thread to update the frame or swap at the same time.

### Changes that you had to project 2:

We made some changes to page_fault in exception.c. It used to be killing the thread with exit failure every page fault, now it checks for causes and allows growing stack.

### Justification:

The lock we made prevents race conditions among multiple threads. And we also have extensive safety checking (using ASSERT and PANIC) throughout the code, to ensure that every error or unexpected behavior is caught.
